good morning everybody I'm Jim Gray
welcome you to The milkin
Institute everybody is here to see this
man the one and only the great Kobe
Bryant Kobe thank you for joining us
thank you for having me how's your first
week of retirement it's been it's been
uh it's been good it's been good you
know I wish I could say I've been
relaxing but I
haven't um but it's uh it's been
fun you leave with a 60-point game and
we had a chance to talk right after the
game very very few people can leave like
that but does it cause you to retrace in
your brain perhaps I can still do this
maybe I'm leaving a little bit too early
instead of a little bit too
soon um it could um but you know I
consider myself very lucky because it
it's I didn't stop playing the game
because I didn't feel like I could play
at a certain level anymore you know I
stopped playing because I just didn't
want to do it anymore you know it just
kind of why after 20 years what hit you
you know I it's just uh I think it's
just part
of of evolution you know I felt like I
wanted to move on to something else and
my passion and my focus started shifting
towards what comes next versus being
completely obsessed with the game itself
so I had that inner uh comfort of uh
walking away from the game nothing to do
with scoring 60 or 50 or whatever the
case may be that was completely
irrelevant to me if you had a better
team the last couple of years wouldn't
make a difference
seriously wouldn't make a difference Ian
I've hadent opportun seven eight n or
whatever might doesn't matter because I
you know when I made the announcement
made the decision um you know I kept
tossing and turning with all right how
do you know and I kept thinking well I
want this to be the last year but we'll
see what happens at the end of the
season right we'll see what happens if I
get on the contending team we win but
the reality is you can't make this type
of a decision based on outside
circumstances right this must be a
decision that comes from within either
you want to play or you don't want to
play and the question once I answered
that question it was very easy let's go
back to the
beginning I remember when you came into
the league and I remember
you playing in the bowels of the
spectrum as a very very little little
boy and then to see you at Lura Mary in
high school and then you came into the
NBA was with the Hornets for about 20
seconds and and became a Laker what was
your expectation of yourself and your
goal when you came into the
league God it's hard to remember back
that long uh you know I remember being
extremely excited um but also being
extremely focused because there was a
lot of talk um as to whether or not I
was making the right decision um and
there's a lot of people that that were
saying I was going to be a failure and
so I remember my concentration being
extremely extremely high and and not
having
even one day to really enjoy it or
celebrate it I was back at the gym and
working extremely hard um CU I felt like
there was just so much at
stake was it your goal to
be the best basketball player on the
planet yes it was yeah did you achieve
that um well it's funny like you as a
kid you know I was growing up and I say
I want to be the greatest that ever
played right and and then as you get
older you start understanding that
there's really there's no real answer to
that right and you know I found a lot of
comfort once I realized that my goal
really is to be the best player I can be
and then what that means is that means
helping my teammates be the best players
that they can be and once I figured that
out um then my game went to another
level when did you figure that out and
how did you figure that out what was the
transformation trial an error it was a
process I mean you you keep banging your
head into a wall you know eventually
you're gonna try to look for the door
and the key you know and so um that's
what I had to do it was a lot of
research for me it was a lot of reading
it was a lot of studying it was a lot of
listening and try to really figure out
what makes people take and uh how do you
motivate your teammates I mean it's one
thing to say do this do that but how do
you really motivate them to the point
where they feel where they're the ones
asking the questions of how to improve
themselves like when how do you flip the
switch with help somebody flip the
switch within themselves um to to reach
their full potential and that that's
really the dance so you're banging your
head against this wall and this door are
you saying at that time you were
stubborn I'm stubborn now I mean you
know I'm just a little less
stubborn I'm stubborn with a greater
sense of perspective how about
that when they came to you with
questions how did you know how to
motivate and who you could push and who
you couldn't was that also trial and
error yeah um it is uh and it was um
before the for the most part you know
what I had to become better at was just
listening just
listen right you know the guys are
they'll they'll tell you how they're
feeling they they'll tell you you know
where their um insecurities lie where
their strengths are and you just have to
listen and have to really understand it
and it's hard in professional sports
because like if you watch a game you
watch teams warm up right you'll see
players most of the players are really
locked in internally like they're locked
into their own situation you know their
routine right and uh what I started
doing is I I started stepping back and
instead of working on this shot that
shot before a game I started watching
you know what is pal doing what is Lamar
doing and what's D fish doing you can
kind of see you know what their
temperament is so it's it's it's
listening it's listening and it's also
observing and and and taking that all
into
account so what's it like to be you I
mean
[Music]
very few people I mean Michael Jordan
Wayne Gretzky Joe Montana Tiger Woods
are at Tom Brady are at the Pinnacle and
can walk around with this moniker of the
best basketball player on the planet the
best anything on the planet you don't
have a moment really to yourself it's
impossible to have a conversation with
you anytime unless we're sitting in your
home
because there's a crush everybody wants
your time so I'm just wondering how do
you handle that and what what's it like
to walk around as you well you know it's
uh you there there's that aspect to it
but there's also the aspect where you
really have an opportunity to make a lot
of people
happy come up to you in the street shake
your hand they want to talk about being
at the 81 point game or the 60o game and
you you get a chance to make a lot of
people happy so you know you know it's
easy to look at the negative side of
those things um but I think the
positives vastly outweigh the
negatives did you suffer because you
were so myopic the tunnel vision and and
and wanting to attain your goals um
suffer no
friends um
no these are his words folks yeah not
mine a lot of that tongue and cheek I me
you know
you it's uh obviously I had a friend
um I know you did but you know what I
mean I know what you mean I know what
you mean it takes a lot to have a friend
it takes time you have to have an
investment sure sure it's uh these are
choices like I I made a conscious
Choice um to go after my passion
obsessively it's a conscious decision so
it's not like you
know he missed out on that he missed out
on that like no I made a choice to
consciously miss out on those things
because I much rather be
here it's more about the sacrifice I
guess is the question but that's my
point it's not a sacrifice to me okay
you know what I'm saying it's not a sa
like this is my choice like I'd rather
do this like if you put a you know a
bowl of ice cream in front of the kid
and a plate of broccoli the kid is
probably going to eat the ice cream
right so to me the game is the ice cream
to some people on the outside all this
hard work looks like broccoli it's all
perspective
[Applause]
you had a lot of ice cream in a
different way a lot of ice
cream how much do you detest a lack of
hard work and despise lazy it drives me
crazy I don't understand it but but you
know at the same time I was uh I talk to
my kids about hard work and stuff and I
say honey you know you can even either
be the lion or you can be the
gazelle nature needs
both right so you got to have
hardworking people you have to have lazy
people it's it's the balance of all
things right so I much rather you be the
lion but if you want to be the gazelle
honey be the fastest gazelle in the
world you
know how did your kids take that
conversation I'll be the lion tell I ask
my girl all right so when you saw that
you couldn't motivate others and they
were lazy or they didn't put out the
same effort that you had in yourself and
expected in them how did you respond
well I I I um go up to Phil Phil's
office and Mitch's office and we' have a
nice salary cap conversation about how
we can move these
players and get them out of there pack
them up and move them out so you were
the general manager well no but I was
the one that was like listen at the end
of the day when the career is said and
done you know I'd be damned if I don't
lose if I I lose these championships
because I'm playing with a bunch of lazy
dudes this is not happening right so
either you know this train is going this
way one way or the other you're going to
be on it you're going to be off it or
you going to be under
it right it's just it is what it is it
is what it is so if you you know I like
to motivate
players to be better I don't want to
have to motivate you to get in the gym
in the first place you have to motivate
you get in the gym in the first place
you probably you're probably playing
basketball because it was easy for you
or whatever other reason that's not your
true calling that's not your true
passion uh maybe it was something else
and you know I just want to help you
find it someplace
[Music]
else so I'm really like doing them a
favor how would you describe yourself as
a
teammate um well extremely unselfish as
you just saw like I'm helping them out
so I mean what more can I do man
congratulations yeah thank you thank
thank you thank
you amplify on that if you would would
you put your arm around a guy was it
always tough love how how would you go
about it it's a you you have to balance
those things so you know every teammate
responds differently right like you know
pal responds differently you have to be
able to push pal needle pal a little bit
understand when to put your arm around
him and talk to him and you know it's a
it's a it's a fine it's a fine dance I
you can't treat them all equally and it
goes back to listening you have to be
able to listen to the guys and
understand who they are as people what
their Journey has been to get to this
point and then from that you can make
decisions in the moment of how to
respond to certain situations with them
how did you do that with
Shaq well with Shaq it was it was
interesting with Shaq I had to challenge
Shaq all the time all the time I mean
we'd be in practice and um you know Mark
Madson who was on the second team and
you know Mark could be you know Mark's
like full of energy all the time and
like we're coming off of a back to back
and Phil Nevis gave us days off right we
show up to practice and Mark's just
running in the shack and just you know
Shack's just trying to not to get hurt
at this point and uh you know I would
just go to Phil and say Phil hey put me
on the second team so he put me on the
second team and now I'm playing with
Mark and all it takes just one just one
thing I said Shaq you're are not the
most dominant Center of all time you're
not even the best player on the team
[Laughter]
then that's it then all of a sudden it's
trash talking all day you know the
physical the physicality of the practice
goes to another level and you know poor
Martin he just like demolished poor Mark
after
that but that's how we but you were
being serious weren't you was kidding on
the level but you were there was a
serious vein in you can't you can't
really you can't talk trash and say
things that are just
unrealistic you know you know what I'm
saying like I'll be like I'll play in uh
there was a game in Utah during the
playoffs
mhm back in the day and uh I'm in I'm
taking the ball out of bounds it's like
the fourth quarter and the fan yells
behind me goes Kobe you're garbage I
turn around I said dude be more creative
like that's we both know that's not true
like like you like say something that's
kind of somewhat realistic that can like
needle me a little bit like so what's
the best what's the best thing you heard
from a fan that guy in Washington did he
drive you crazy no no I was I was too
young for that like I was on a bench I
watched him you know Drive everybody
else crazy but um when 2005 2006 I would
get you can't win without
Shaq
okay I had no response right so I had to
just buy my time until but I remember
that fan he was in
Sacramento
I do said right behind the scores table
with the cowbell after 2009 I went back
and said hey I see
you yep and there's somebody we see here
in the front row that I want to
acknowledge I want to thank he's made it
better for all of us that's commissioner
David Stern David thank you for joining
us you know it's um I grew up you know
when I growing up overseas the game
wasn't as Global then as it is now and
so my grandfather used to record all the
games send me all the games you know but
the thing that I don't even know if he
knows but the biggest impact that he had
on me was the NBA entertainment
division because all the videos that
they used to put out the history of the
game the golden greates back toback
videos the Come Fly With Me the Larry
Legends and all stuff and I used to sit
at home and just digest these things man
just digest them and so you know um I
learned the game so much from those
videos and obviously what he's done for
the game now I it's so International
it's unbelievable so let's go back to
Shaq for a moment did it work in terms
of motivation and did you get more out
of him or did it just cause this gulf
that became so wide that it was possible
to coexist no we were smart enough to
understand what we were doing for each
other like we we we knew that we needed
each other to be
successful and uh the tension that we
had with each other created an
environment of um brutal honesty brutal
honesty you know my teammates felt I
wasn't passing the ball to them I didn't
see them they'd say it if I felt like
Shaq was completely out of shape I'd say
it you and so that trickled down
throughout our entire organization where
this brutal honesty for the benefit of
for the goal of winning a championship
is what we stood for so from the outside
you see this tension you see this FR
friction but internally we understand
that this is getting us to to this place
so it worked just fine so then what
caused the ultimate
fracture you can't win without Shaq dude
seriously right so it's that
challenge that created that separation
eventually because you know I read a
story
where um Shaq said that you know I
couldn't win without him once I saw that
I was like
okay we're done yeah we'll see because
you know it's it's I felt like I had a
lot more in there and uh you I wasn't
going to
retire um without
knowing if I could
have so you satisfied what you wanted to
do on your own now do you look back and
you say that was good that I did that or
do you feel somewhat maybe remorseful or
Melancholy that perhaps if You' have
stayed together you'd have had even
more no I'm happy I have five and he has
four you know
I'm okay with
that and how are you all today fantastic
because I have five and he has
four so we're all good no I mean we see
each other we catch up all the time you
know he asked me about my kids I asked
him about his and um it's great man
M during that period though things were
not easy there was also a golf and and a
problem with your coach Phil Jackson who
I know you have the ultimate respect for
but there was a time that and I'll just
say what you told me you'd like to choke
this guy when wrote that book oh no
question no question but looking back
now the thing that I that that that I
wish I could have done differently is is
structure some kind of business
Arrangement you're selling all these
damn books about me at least let me get
a royalty on it now you can have your
own book to tell the truth are you going
to do that no I don't I don't do that I
got other stuff to do but when he wrote
those
things I think a a lot of people think
that professional athletes don't have
feelings and so when something is
written or said about you that it just
rolls right off and maybe that does with
certain Riders and certain people but
when it's your coach sure it has to
sting and hurt how did you react to that
yeah um it did but you know by that time
I was really really good at taking um
negative things and just refocusing them
right so it didn't Ling it didn't I use
those things to help me get up at 4:00
a.m. and hit the track and then hit the
weights and then get the shots like I
use that as a source of motivation for
me so no matter what said be positive or
be a
negative when you have the the point of
view that no matter what it said it's
going to do nothing but
fuel my passion then you you really
there's nothing anybody can say that's
really going to take you backwards you
know what I mean because you just use it
all
so I want to amplify on that and by
doing so let's take a look at the
symphony
[Applause]
[Music]
commercial
I've been hating
[Music]
you too
long to stop
[Music]
now you're
retire
ring you you want to be
free my hate was growing
stronger as you became a habit to
me don't make me now I well I hate you
with all my
[Applause]
heart I hate you I hate you I
[Music]
[Applause]
make that that's brilliant was that your
idea um the core of it yes so once we
sat around I came up with the idea of
what hero villain represents um from
that Center um an idea that originated
in Kobe Inc then it became very easy to
to partial those things off to our
various Partners you know Nike and so
forth right but the idea starts with us
at its core of what the hero villain is
and then from that things can be created
explain the hero villain um hero villain
is a simple philosophy if you take how
do you CH channel the villain to unleash
the hero how to use Darkness to create
greatness you know that's the that's the
prise of it so why do you think you were
booed particularly that night in
Philadelphia and we did the interview
together at the All-Star Game and you
played very well and you're from
Philadelphia and the booze are pouring
down while we're doing this interview
and while you're wrapping up the game
and it set me back and I'm not you yeah
well I mean so what what are you
thinking while this is going on and are
you wondering why no that's that's tough
I mean you feel I mean they feel These
Boots s CLA
before seriously like literally um so no
I mean it's uh but you're still young
and impressionable at that time or at
least you know not not the warrior
travel hardened guy no but that drive
was still there man that that you know
um taking those negative experiences and
using them that was that was always
there right so once I had that once I
embraced it I just I used it
I used it was there a model you followed
perhaps Ali or or somebody Who You'd
seen have this sort of
circumstance um not one in particular
but I I used to read a lot um and watch
a lot and um you about people who have
done phenomenal things or have created
great things and then try to ask okay
how they did them um and then why and
kind of what what was their Journey you
know what their process and and not so
much like the like the actual
executional details of how you create X
Y and Z but it's more so the inner
Journey that they go through and from
that I was able to learn a lot myself um
but I was always still now I mean
reading a lot and learning a lot like
what what type of books what type of
material people
mhm the journey that people go through
like what is the inner conversation that
they have the inner monologue how do you
how do each of us navigate through our
own um
insecurities our own moments of doubt
and then when you have those doubts
understanding where do those doubts come
from in the first place you know and I
think once you understand that then
really you can create anything you want
you it's just a matter of first how to
navigate the Journey of the self once
you have that you can be dropped into
any industry whatsoever and you can
figure it
out we see you as a real confidence guy
he'll take every last shot he'll go out
and you'll take 50 shots um what doubts
do you have about yourself
internally it's not I've never doubted
such a strange thing I mean it's um you
know there'll be times where you succeed
and there times that you
fail so waste wasting your time doubting
whether you're going to be successful or
not is
pointless it is you just put one foot in
front of the other you control what you
can't control and then you see what the
outcome is right if you win great you're
going to have to wake up the next day
and do the journey over again if you
lose sucks but you're going to have to
wake up the next day and do the journey
all over again anyway right so it's
really pointless to sit here and debate
or have doubt or this that and the other
you train as hard as you can and you
step out there and you let it flow how
much did the losses bother
you well they bother me but then I was
able to let them go big losses
Championship losses Pistons 2004 yeah
you let him go and you I what I did is I
learned from them you know very specific
things like you know against the
Pistons we didn't execute well enough to
beat the Detroit Pistons um I don't want
to get all basketball techie or whatever
but I can't help myself so um if you
watch the series the Pistons brought
pressure full court right which forced
us to stretch our offense in order to
stretch the triangle offense you really
have to be sharp like you have to
understand what the sequences of options
are Stone Cold to run at 94t and we
weren't ready to do that you know if you
look at the series uh you compare that
to Larry Brown in Philadelphia when we
played him in 2001 and he tried to apply
the same pressure and we beat the hell
out of them because that team was
extremely well prepared to execute that
and I and I point the finger out myself
and I put my teammates in those right
positions from day one so that we were
ready for that in case that happened are
you a
perfectionist for better for worse
yeah so was your experience a joyous
occasion or did you become like many
people who touch
Perfection can never really totally
harness it nobody can so were you
tortured by the
journey no well I'm I'm realistic I'm a
real I'm a realistic perfectionist how
about that it's pretty good I understand
and that Perfection can never be
attained but it sure it is a hell of a
lot of fun trying to get
it but some of your brethren in fact
people who you're close to drives them
so crazy that they can't function Tiger
Woods you know an unbelievable 15-year
run mhm and dominant like we've never
seen mhm but it was totally joyless each
step was a
struggle it becomes hard I mean so so
how did you know how to become realistic
as a
perfectionist well um because you know I
know that Perfection isn't a real thing
like there's some people in this world
who are like just insanely competitive
about everything right so like you know
if you come up to me and say hey let's
play pingpong and you know we bet five
bucks on this ping pong game and I watch
you play and you're better than I am I'm
good I'm not going to
play I can't beat you why hell am I
going to do that right um Michael
Michael and I had this conversation
recently said okay now that you're
retirement you can come out with me and
play golf said
no so you're going to have to play golf
yeah not with you though I mean
cuz been playing since College like you
want to get me out there and just kill
me like no I'm not a golfer I'm not
going to play I'm a
realist so take us inside what your
conversations with Michael would be
because you guys are one and two of a
kind um he he uh it's like a big brother
um from the second time I played him in
1998 and uh I asked him a couple
questions and he gave me some very
detailed responses and he said hey I'm
going send send over my number um if you
need anything just just call to this day
I I call him for anything he calls me
right back and you we'll have very
in-depth conversations um he'll share
whatever it is that he's learned over
his career you know be it leadership or
you know how to chase guys off the
screens I mean he's been a fantastic
Mentor leadership's an interesting
question how did you know when to lead
and when to be
passive all right I can I'm give a give
a very weird answer to that just like
stay with me for a second so we uh my
wife and I went on vacation this was
after 200 2008 finals where we lost to
the Celtics
and uh we went on vacation in France and
we're walking
around um and the thing that was really
beautiful to me was you know how
beautiful everything was how beautiful
nature was the flower the trees
everything was just gorgeous and um and
my mind got to thinking well you know I
noticed the beauty of these things in
their in their
elements but these things cannot be
beautiful without the Sun but yet I'm
not sitting here and saying wow the sun
is so beautiful right I'm appreciating
their own Standalone Beauty right and by
the same token The Sun Also knows when
to
disappear right too much of the sun
becomes hazardous right and so that
helped me understand how to lead my team
right so when you come back in 2009 and
you watch the Lakers play you're not
watching Lamar Odin play and saying wow
he's great because Kobe's there Kobe's
making him better right that's not
you know he you have to sit and watch
the game and appreciate Lamar Odum in
his own right pal in his own right so as
a leader in practice you're there you're
helping them grow but you also have to
know when to go away right and let them
grow on their own and so that walk kind
of helped change my perspective on how I
approach leading so you were still
learning and that's 12 years into the
journey this still still learning now
still learning now so when you backed
off and people would say
he's not
leading no I just thought they were just
very stupid people
okay but you read that yeah you'd see
that yeah and obviously you read and saw
a lot more than you ever indicated you
read and you saw no I I no seriously I
just got you
know you know the commentating and the
broadcasting a lot of times is just very
it's like very surface information it's
like things that are very easy to digest
like okay you make your teammates better
by passing the
ball you pass to him and he missed 30
times I mean that's you know right the
key is not passing the ball the key is
how do you motivate them so that they
stay in the gym an hour after practice
shooting shots and making shots so that
when they do get the ball they're ready
to knock it down I mean you know that's
making people better is how do you get
them to want to be the best version of
themselves that's making somebody better
truly
better so did what we say or what the
media wrote piss you off father no I
found it funny seriously that that
wasn't like a source of motivation for
me it was always like kind of like the
cherry on top where I can just kind of
needle you guys every now and then you
guys were wrong but I it never really
motivated me um if I needed it I'd use
it but it wasn't something that drove me
day in and day out explain what it's
like to focus and to have that vision
or maybe even a little wider than the
vision of what's necessary to
win well it's
um you know you watch game film and you
study with the team does well but they
don't do well what they like to run when
they like to run it strengths weaknesses
yada y y and then from that you devise
your
plan and then you go out and you try to
execute that plan and now after you have
that plan you also have to have a backup
right because you have to count on them
making adjustments right so if they make
adjustments I have to be able to go to
Pal and you know being prepared have to
go to Pal say okay they did this like we
thought they were going to do like we
talked about it now let's go to this
right so it's nothing more than homework
I don't have to rely on imagination or
being creative to be creative you you
sit down you watch you prepare and the
answers are literally right in front of
you you know but it's just taking the
time to sit and watch it was winning the
only thing that mattered to you
it was at the beginning um but after
that um after a while there and
particularly after you know
2008 it became getting the best out of
the other guys that I'm playing
with that became my mission and funny
things once that happened then we
started
winning so I believe knowing you that
you're greatness is in your future that
it's not in the rear viw mirror of what
you've done on a basketball court how
are you going to apply everything that
made you what you are and got you to
this point now in Kobe Inc and your
after basketball life well I mean the
hardest part for that has been trying to
figure out what comes next you know it's
uh it used to terrify me 20 21 years old
um looking at athletes who've retired
and really have nothing to go to you
kind of try to figure it out like you
retire and you say okay I got to figure
things out and um I didn't want that
that you know so at the age of 20 and 21
I started really reading a lot and
trying to like find what do I love to do
and you know I was fortunate but
unfortunate to have these injuries you
know with the Achilles the shoulder and
the knee um I say fortunate because it
gave me a lot of time to think gave me a
lot of time to sit gave me a lot of time
to say man my career could be over right
now and all of this work that you've
done trying to figure out what comes
next you're unprepared
for right I I didn't want that so I kept
thinking asking the wrong
question which's the biggest industry I
can get into what industry can I can get
I can get into that has the biggest
upside wrong question and then I started
asking what do you like doing what do
you love to do the most I love
storytelling I absolutely love it love
it love it love it love it love it and
uh and so that's what I decided to do so
you want to tell stories now you started
with your own story which was Muse which
was on Showtime which was a terrific
documentary and if you haven't seen it I
recommend that you get it on demand or
go to showtime.com thank you um that was
your first start were you pleased with
that effort yeah I was you know it's uh
you know storytelling gives you such a
such a broad lens um you know but the
opportunities that that you have in
media and Technology the opportunities
that you have to entertain and educate
are endless I mean literally story is
the seed of everything it's the seed of
everything none of us would be sitting
in this room right now without the power
of story because somewhere somewhere
along the lines you either read a story
you either heard a story that inspired
you and that gave you
that you know that that that dream of
accomplishing what it is that you've
accomplished so I think story story can
seriously can literally change the world
and I am extremely fascinated by that
and even beyond that storytelling
through
Sports what does that look like
you sit there and you I'm sure a lot of
us have many of you have kids at home
that play sports you tuck your kids in
the bed you read them a
book what sports book are you going to
read to them that touches fantasy right
that touches the imagination that adds
mythology to it there are no stories out
there like that and I'm really really
really really excited about bringing
that to the world how are you doing with
it oh great I mean it's it's I love it
mean you've been doing this Plus
basketball it's just not a week long
event now we're two week long oh you
know it's funny like um the day of the
last game after the game I got a lot of
questions about what this day was like
you know and um I woke up took the kids
to school went to the office and sat
there and wrote stories edited
stories till 4 4 4:30 4:30 went home
changed went to the game
woke up the next morning went back to
the
office guess it wasn't too much
different than what you had been doing
other than basketball the the point is
and I really want athletes to understand
this is that you really have to work
hard to figure out what comes next like
for some of us like we were born and
basketball was here like I started
playing basketball when I was two you
know and for a lot of us it's really
easy that first phase but it's really
really hard to find something else that
you love just as much or more so right
and that's really the key it's not
keeping yourself busy it's like you have
to figure out what it is that you really
want to do like wake up in the morning
and say y I'm excited to go do this what
is that once you figure that out
everything will be fine you think you'll
have that same passion well I have it
now I mean I can't you know I'm really
really really really fortunate to be
able to sit here and say that like I you
know I love being here with you fine
folks but I'd rather be at the office
writing stories right now
honestly
so much I enjoy this well maybe that'll
maybe that'll change with this question
how many of you folks out there would
like to be in business with Kobe Bryant
raise your
hand like I don't know after hearing
some of these leadership stories man I
don't know if I want to be a lot of
hands there Kobe I'm sure a lot of those
people have
stories maybe you'll tell their stories
uh I want to go back to a couple of
other things here um best player you
ever
faced uh we count Michael Jordan that or
no sure yeah it's he would be ever right
Michael Michael no question and now
current day uh see the hardest player I
had to defend was um Kevin Durant he
gave me the most problems because of his
length and his versatility he's the one
I had trouble guarding the most I
remember when Julius Irving and you may
have been at that game did that great
dunk under the rim against the Lakers in
the finals and Magic was standing there
and Magic has a very famous quote
afterwards he says you know we really
didn't know what to do ask him would he
do it again or inbound the
ball so I'm wondering who you admire and
like watching and became mesmerized with
while you were on the court and said
gez that guy really just did that
there's a lot of players I mean you know
there's a lot of players that have done
things during the game where I was just
like
damn it's a nice move it's a nice move
and I tell him I said it was a nice move
but I'll be ready for that next time but
is there apprciate there somebody who
causes you to St as Steph Curry I mean
he seems to have captured the
imagination of the country and yeah but
they you know the point is that there's
so many great athletes and players like
they all like Steph Curry does that
Westbrook does that Qui Leonard will do
that Damen Lillard to do that I mean
there there's a lot of players that will
just do something that is just so
phenomenal and they make it seem so easy
that you have to appreciate it so it's
happened over and over with me over the
years do you have an eye for talent uh
uh I could tell if a player sucks pretty
easily let's take it back to when there
were children because you saw Klay
Thompson as a child you saw Steph Curry
as a child yeah did you see greatness in
their future um no it's it's hard to
determine what that is you know
um I had a uh I did a Nike skills
academy years ago and um Steph was one
of the players here and he just kind of
flew under the radar you know because
it's you can see how a player shoots you
can see how he moves how he passes but
what you can't see is you can't see
what's in here you know you can't see
the inner determination that they have
or or their ability to navigate through
their own emotions that you can't see
you have to be around a player you have
to see them go through things and you
have to see how they handle it and how
they channel that sort of stuff so you
know that part is very hard to hard to
read so what's this final year been like
for you uh we've seen the agulation
we've seen the full circle you've gone
from somebody who they cheered for as a
real young man coming out of Lowa Maran
to being booed to being hated to the
hero villain to five championships to
now this outpouring which has been
unbelievable how has it been to receive
this it's been an amazing feeling um to
have this year where you know I can say
thank you to them and vice versa because
they really pushed me to um try to be
the best version of myself and to have
all those years where we've had these
rivalries and these heated
confrontations that all come to this
point where we can kind of look at each
other and kind
of you know salute each other is uh it's
been great what did you
expect did you think this would occur uh
no no I was really surprised um you
first first game after I announced um it
being in Philadelphia and the reaction
and the Ovation um that I got there was
um um it was really unexpected I can see
a little welling up here in your eyes
was there somebody or something along
the way that touched you oh let's not go
that
far perhaps the lights are just bright
was there something that touched you
however along the way yeah the game in
Philadelphia really did because that you
know there was like ushers that were
there when I was like a baby you know
what I mean and they remember me when I
was a baby and my coach was there a lot
of my high school teammates were there
and high school friends were there so um
you know being in that environment was
very
emotional to have been like the
commercial suggested you hate me and I
accept that and how to be loved is that
a heart
adjustment uh well yeah I mean you
played the other one pretty well it
worked for you yeah I'm more comfortable
in in that you know um especially when
it comes to competition um
but uh yeah it took took a took a
littleit little bit of
adjusting was a little uncomfortable I'm
not quite sure like do you wave like
this you like kind of like you know what
do you not you know what I mean like I'm
not sure what to do there you just kind
of like you know so how is your family
uh dealt the hate part's easy you
just how's your family dealt with having
to share their father and their husband
with the world no they've been great you
know I I've um you know they've they've
been around me um you know doing the
training and Recovery like they've been
a part of the process you know um and
they were really happy you know the last
game when I scored 60 it was like whoa
dad what was that you know what I mean
cuz they hadn't they hadn't seen that
you know and so it felt good to kind of
take them down memory lane a little bit
and say you know your dad used to be
really really
good then have to go to YouTube tonight
yeah no you didn't have to go to YouTube
tonight tonight you can see it live in
in person was like that was that was
awesome you know I remember when John
Madden retired he told me he retired
because he wanted to spend more time
with his family and he said he was home
for about three weeks and his family
decided they didn't want to spend more
time with
him that's
funny do you have a plan if this doesn't
go right and get out of the house little
bit you're used to traveling yeah I can
see how that could happen but no I I you
know like I said I have a very clear
purpose of what to do I have something
to go to you know I have I have
something I'm really passionate about so
you know and for the last three years um
I've been injured so I've been at home
most of the time anyway right so I know
the kids schedules like I know when to
pick them up I know when drop off is I
know when so and so has ballet I know
when so and so has this any the other
like I I know those things and I know
what time I need to be there and all of
the stuff so I'm
already kind of house broken
already you sound like a man who is
totally satisfied and totally
comfortable with what you've achieved
and where you are in life I am I feel I
feel fantastic you know it's uh it'
probably be different if I
didn't give it my all every day you know
and then you have regrets you have
regrets I think the key is really not to
focus on the accomplishments but more so
in the effort that you put in to try to
accomplish those things because at the
end of the day if you look in the mirror
and say I gave it everything I had then
you can be comfortable which is why I
feel comfortable sitting here today well
you gave us all one more thrill a couple
of weeks ago so if we can queue up the
tape let's take a look at how Kobe
Bryant decided to say goodbye to Los
Angeles world chion
[Applause]
[Music]
in a
row
the
this is
like for
three that was a dagger that's the old
P Kobe Baseline over Netto has
[Applause]
53 unbelievable stuff
tonight Kobe's got the Lakers last tck
bran for three
got bran on the move with the
[Applause]
[Music]
jumper 58
points and the lers
lead he has 6 60-point games in his
[Applause]
career
[Music]
had you reviewed that before is this the
first time you're seeing this no I I
watched it and I was like nitpicking
like man I should have had 80
I'm looking like at the you know certain
balance you know the one shot uh the
three-pointer I hit at the end of the
game going left it was like there's no
kids in the room so you don't do this
but like if you ride on a bicycle and
your kid yeah you ever play this game
with your friends or you have to throw a
rock and try to hit like the telephone
pole so as you're moving this way you
kind of have to throw it back right
right if you throw it directly this way
you're going to miss it right so you
kind of got to throw it back and so
hitting that shot I literally thought of
being on the BMX bike and trying to hit
one of those things seriously because if
you look at the shot I'm sliding left so
I'm off balance cuz my legs are tired so
I had to pull the follow through back so
I had to shoot it back a little bit for
it to have a chance to go in so
inspiration comes from
everywhere you know it didn't look good
in that game for quite a while how did
you will your team back and and and you
scored those 17 straight points and had
a huge fourth quarter
and they got out of your way if that's
the right term but you were exhausted
how how did you do that well because I
you know there's no tomorrow you know
literally literally I mean it's like you
know everything that you have you give
but now like I've made the decision to
do that I'm comfortable going past
exhaustion now it becomes an executional
thing okay make sure you're having your
balance on your shot right making sure
you're reading the defense correctly
make sure you're taking your time like
it went back to like the like the basics
of the game how to handle screen roll
we're a double teams coming from right
all those little things it wasn't a
championship but on an individual level
was it possibly as
exhilarating um yeah I mean this is what
the fans came to see you know it was
like you know this was the moment to say
goodbye and you know I wanted to be able
to say bye and and I'm I called my wife
before the game and I said I it feels
feels like everybody wants to be
sad you know I'm not sad like hopefully
we can make this night some type of
Celebration where I can give them
something where they're not thinking
about the fact that this is my last game
like they're just thinking about this is
a hell of a game to watch you know and
fortunately it worked out that way and
what was the car ride home like that
night with Vanessa and your children oh
well you know Vanessa's funny she's
it's about time you play like you used
to
play and the kids are like man that was
awesome was awesome um but those free
throws there were funny because um it
was uh you wanted 60 you you knew where
you were it it would be so anticlimactic
I missed that free
throw but when I if you if you contrast
that with the 81o game and the free
throw that I hit there I remember taking
a free throw for the 81 point game G and
looking and seeing all the fans standing
up and watching and then flip that with
this one and St at the free throw line
all I saw was the back of
phones and I I was I like had to refrain
from smirking cuz it was like damn I'm
old as hell like last time this happened
it was just eyeballs and now it's like
the back of phones and like it was crazy
it was like a sea of phones when you had
the
you grew up in
Philadelphia in that Arena you saw that
picture every time you went into the
Spectrum ofl with 100 yep Hershey
Pennsylvania that's what did you think
about that when you had your 81 I
thought about it after thought about it
after and you know I thought about you
know all the times I was a kid and I
dreamed of scoring 100 points like I
dream about it and I try to work it out
in my brain like this is this is this
can logically be done right cuz if you
score 20 points the first quarter now
you're on fire now second quarter you
have 20 because you scored 20 one
quarter you can score 20 another right
if you scored 20 to First score 20 to
Second that's a 40-point night already
right and so now you're rolling so at
that point the momentum just feeds upon
itself so now you come out the third
quarter get off to a good start might
have 10 quick points all of a sudden
there you are sitting at 50 with a lot
of game to go right and so that's how I
always kind of processed that and worked
it out to believe that this is actually
possible when you look back in that game
do you think you should have had more
just like when you look back on your
championships do you think more about
the games you won and the titles you won
or the couple that got away I do both I
do I do a balance of both you know I
enjoy it but I also look at things that
I could have done differently or done
better because that's you know that's
how you learn you you have to be able to
look at things and not just like like
the last game was something I could look
at the highlights just for pure
entertainment you know and just make
little criticisms but n Let It Go what
are you gonna do now right well back
then it was like you can't you have to
look at those performances and nitpick
every little thing to learn from Kobe
congratulations it's been a wonderful
career it's been my honor to have been
able to cover you I did the first
interview you ever did you allowed me to
do the last interview in your Laker
uniform it's been a privilege and thank
you for all you've given thank you man I
appreciate
it